🔹 What is Execution Context in JavaScript?

Execution context = environment where JavaScript code is executed.
It decides:

Which variables and functions can be accessed.

How the value of this is determined.

How code is executed step by step.

🔹 Types of Execution Context

Global Execution Context (GEC)

Function Execution Context (FEC)

Eval Execution Context (rarely used)

🔹 Global Execution Context (GEC)

This is the default execution context.

It is created when the JavaScript program starts running.

All code that is not inside a function runs in the GEC.

🔹 Key Features of GEC

Global Object is created

In browsers → window object

In Node.js → global object

this keyword points to the global object

In browsers → this === window

Memory allocation happens for variables and functions declared in the global scope.

var → becomes a property of the global object

let and const → stored in a separate "Script scope" (not attached to global object)

Only one Global Execution Context exists per program.

🔹 Example
var x = 10;
let y = 20;

function greet() {
  console.log("Hello!");
}

console.log(this);      // window (in browsers)
console.log(window.x);  // 10 (because var attaches to global object)
console.log(window.y);  // undefined (because let doesn’t attach)


Here, x, y, and greet are in the Global Execution Context.

this inside GEC refers to the window object in browsers.

Who runs the code inside a function?

👉 When a function is called, JavaScript creates a new Execution Context for that function.
This is called a Function Execution Context (FEC).

The Global Execution Context (GEC) runs first (when your program starts).

Every time you call a function → a new FEC is created.

That FEC is pushed onto the Call Stack and executes the function code.

🔹 Steps when a function runs

Function is invoked

Example: greet();

New Function Execution Context (FEC) is created

It has:

Its own Variable Environment (local variables, function args).

Scope chain (access to outer scopes).

this value (depends on how the function is called).

FEC runs the function’s code

When the function finishes, the FEC is popped off the Call Stack.

🔹 Example
function greet(name) {
  let message = "Hello " + name;
  console.log(message);
}

greet("Priyanshu");


How it runs:

Program starts → GEC is created.

greet("Priyanshu") is called.

New FEC is created:

Argument: name = "Priyanshu"

Local variable: message = "Hello Priyanshu"

this (depends on how function is called, but usually window in non-strict mode).

FEC executes → prints "Hello Priyanshu".

FEC is removed after function finishes.


Eval Execution Context in JavaScript

Created when JavaScript code runs inside the eval() function.

Example:

eval("var a = 10; console.log(a);"); // prints 10


eval() executes the string as code in the current scope.

🔹 Key Points

Temporary execution context is created when eval() runs.

Code inside eval() has access to local scope + global scope.

Variables declared inside eval() can leak into the current scope (in non-strict mode).

function test() {
  eval("var x = 100;");
  console.log(x); // 100
}
test();


In strict mode, variables declared inside eval() stay local to eval only.

'use strict';
eval("var x = 200;");
console.log(typeof x); // "undefined"


Eval Execution Context is rarely used → it is slow and unsafe (security risks).

✅ Interview line:
“Eval Execution Context is created when eval() runs. It executes code from a string in the current scope, but it’s discouraged in practice because it’s slow and insecure.
Why eval() is slow

Code parsing again

Normally, JavaScript is parsed once before execution.

But with eval("some code"), the string has to be parsed and compiled again at runtime → adds overhead.

Prevents optimizations

Modern JS engines (like V8 in Chrome) optimize code for speed.

If eval() is used, the engine can’t predict what code might appear at runtime → turns off many optimizations.

🔹 Why eval() is unsafe

Code injection attacks

If user input is passed to eval(), an attacker can run malicious code.

Example:

let userInput = "alert('Hacked!')";
eval(userInput); // runs attacker’s code


Access to local scope

eval() can access and modify variables in the current scope → can lead to unexpected bugs.

Hard to debug and maintain

Since code is inside a string, errors are harder to trace.